hey this is pressure Walker and you're
watching mind your decisions here's a
really fun and challenging geometry
problem that's been spreading around the
internet start out with this square with
a side length of 10 on one side draw a
semicircle and on an adjacent side draw
another semicircle now between the two
corners of the square draw a quarter
circle the challenge is to solve for
this area shaded in red now just to
present it in another way let me label
some of the intersection points ABCD is
a square with a side of 10 APD and CPD
are semi circles and a dqb is a quarter
circle the problem is to solve for the
shaded area dpq I think everyone who
sent me this problem it was a very
popular suggestion and in particular I
think che danielle from india who was
the first person to send me this problem
can you figure it out give this problem
a try and when you're ready keep
watching the video for a solution
[Music]
so how can we solve this problem I admit
it was very challenging I originally
solved it by making a coordinate system
and using calculus to solve integrals
but I suspected this problem could be
solved using geometry and trigonometry
so I posted it to math Stack Exchange
within hours David K Achille Hugh and
Syed posted solutions and I thank them
for helping me understand how to solve
it using elementary methods so in this
video I'm going to present three ways of
solving the problem I'll first go over
the short way using geometry and
trigonometry then I'll present a little
bit of a longer way and then finally
I'll present the calculus solution so
let's get started with the short way in
order to solve for this area we'll solve
it by finding the areas of two shapes
that will be easier to solve for so
we'll solve for this red area as the
area of this blue shape minus the area
of this yellow shape so we have this
equation the blue and yellow shapes are
examples of a shape known as a geometric
lens that's the area when two circles
intersect so since we need to know the
area of a geometric lens let's derive it
generally so we'll start out with a semi
circle with a radius of a and
perpendicular to it we have a semicircle
with a radius of B we want to solve for
this intersection area now to do that
let's connect these two radii to the
intersection point and we form a kite
now let's draw a line across this kite
so we're going to essentially solve for
this shape by solving for each of these
upper and lower shapes so the area of
intersection will be equal to the area
of this circular sector minus the area
of this triangle and that'll give us the
area of this lower half of the lens then
we have this circular sector minus this
triangle and that'll give us the area of
the upper half of the lens now the trick
in this problem
is that we actually don't need to solve
for the areas of the triangles we can
actually solve for the total area that
they span so to do that consider these
two triangles together let's draw the
other diagonal of this kite notice it
divides the kite into two right
triangles now each of these right
triangles has legs of a and B so
together to solve for the total area of
these triangles we need the areas of two
triangles who have one leg of a and one
leg of B so each triangle has an area of
1/2 a B so together both triangles will
be equal to a B so now we need to solve
for the areas of these circular sectors
and then subtract a B and that'll be the
area of this lens so how can we solve
for the areas of each of these circular
sectors well we need to know the radius
of each circular sector that'll be easy
it'll be B for one circular sector and a
for the other and then we need to know
the central angle of each circular
sector so let's consider this right
triangle let's label this angle as theta
the other angle in this triangle will be
PI over 2 minus theta if we look at this
right triangle which is congruent to the
upper right triangle this will also be
theta so here we have a central angle of
2 theta corresponding to the radius of a
so we can solve for the area of this
circular sector
it'll be a squared over 2 times 2 theta
and the other circular sector we have a
central angle that's equal to 2 times
the quantity PI over 2 minus theta so
it'll be equal to PI minus 2 theta so
we'll solve for the area of this
circular sector it'll be B squared over
2 times the quantity PI minus 2 theta
but what is theta well we'll use
trigonometry in the right triangle data
will be equal to the inverse tangent or
the arctangent of B over a so we can
substitute that in for theta and then we
can simplify and this will simplify to
be the quantity a squared minus B
squared times the inverse tangent of B
over a plus PI B squared all over 2 and
then we need to subtract
that a B so this will be the area of a
geometric lens so we now need to apply
this formula to the two lenses in this
blue shape we have a equal to 10 and B
is equal to 5 so we substitute those
into the formula and then we simplify to
get 75 the inverse tangent of 0.5 plus
12.5 PI minus 50 in the yellow shape we
have a and B equal to 5 so we substitute
those in and then we simplify we now
need to subtract the second equation
from the first when we do that we can
cancel out these terms of 12.5 pi and we
get the answer of 75 the inverse tangent
of 0.5 minus 25 and that's approximately
nine point seven seven so that's one way
to get the answer but let's suppose you
didn't realize you need to calculate the
area of a geometric lens how would you
solve the problem well let's go over the
longer geometric way to solve it it's
essentially going to be the same method
but it'll be useful to go over the steps
to reinforce what we just went over in
the short method so let's get started so
let's solve for the area of this yellow
shape to do that let's get rid of some
irrelevant shapes we'll draw a line down
the middle dividing it into two equal
circular segments so we just need to
solve for the area of one circular
segment and then multiplied by two now
to do the area of one of these circular
segments we'll draw in this isosceles
right triangle so this circular segment
will be equal to this quarter circle
minus the area of this triangle as the
radius of this semicircle is five the
area this quarter circle is pi times
five squared over four and the area of
this triangle is five times five over
two so the area of this circular segment
is equal to 25 pi over four minus 25
over to the area of this yellow shape
will equal two times this which will
equal 12.5 pi minus 25 and
is the same result as we had before in
the short method so we now need to solve
for the area of this blue shape how can
we do that we'll draw a line at the two
intersection points and we'll solve for
each of these areas this upper area and
this lower area and we want the sum of
these two areas but we'll solve for them
individually so this upper area how do
we solve for it
well we'll draw in our kite like figure
as before and we'll draw in the values
of these distances
we'll also draw the diagonal this kite
so notice this kite now has two right
triangles who have legs of five and ten
let's label this angle as theta now we
want the area of this upper circular
segment and it'll be equal to the area
of this circular sector minus the area
of this triangle we'll put in the
dimensions of each of these shapes the
area of a circular sector is equal to
1/2 times 10 squared times 2 theta and
the area of this triangle will equal 1/2
times 10 squared times the sine of 2
theta now theta in this case is equal to
the inverse tangent of 5 over 10 or
point 5 we can also solve for the sine
of 2 times theta by the double angle
identity sine of 2 theta is equal to 2
times the sine of theta times the cosine
of theta we can get the sine and the
cosine by solving for the hypotenuse and
then solving for the sine and cosine of
each of these angles and this all
simplifies to be 4 over 5 so we
substitute these values in to our
formula above and we get the area of
this blue shape is equal to the
following which we can simplify to be
100 times the inverse tangent 0.5 minus
40 now to solve for this lower part of
the area we do a very similar
calculation we put in our kite and then
we need to solve for the area of
circular sector - the area of this
triangle now the key in this we have the
dimension which is a radius of five but
we need to know this angle now since one
angle is equal to theta in a right
triangle the other angle will equal PI
over 2 minus theta and this angle will
also equal PI over 2 minus theta so the
central angle will equal pi minus 2
theta so the area of the circular sector
is equal to 5 squared over 2 times the
central angle and the area of this
triangle is 5 squared over 2 times the
sine of this central angle so how can we
simplify this we can simplify sine of PI
minus 2 theta because sine of PI minus 2
theta is equal to sine of 2 theta and we
already figured out sine of 2 theta in
the previous calculation is equal to 4/5
so we substitute these values in and
then simplify to get that this is equal
to 12.5 pi minus 25 the inverse tangent
of 0.5 minus 10 so we now can solve for
the area this blue shape by substituting
in the values we just arrived we then
simplify it to be 75 times the inverse
tangent of 0.5 minus 50 plus 12.5 pi so
now we get the area of this blue shape
and we need to substitute that in and
the substitute in the area of this
yellow shape we then subtract the yellow
shape from the blue shape
so these 12.5 PI's cancel out and it all
simplifies to be 75 times the inverse
tangent of 0.5 minus 25 and that's
approximately nine point seven seven
just as before so you can see if we
didn't see the trick about the triangles
it's a little bit longer but it can be
solved if you work through it now let's
suppose that you couldn't figure out the
geometric way you may have approached it
like I did using calculus so first we'll
put in a coordinate system here's the
y-axis and here is the x-axis will now
label some points in this diagram now
all of these are quarter circles or semi
circles so this curve will equal the
square root of the quantity
25 minus x squared this upper curve will
equal the square root of 100 minus x
squared minus 5 and this semicircle will
equal 5 minus the square root of the
quantity 25 minus the quantity X minus 5
squared so we have three different
curves that are bounding this area now
we can solve for the final intersection
point by equating the two equations this
point will be eight comma one so now we
can solve for the area of this shape as
follows
we need the area of the upper curve
going between 0 & 8 and then we subtract
the area of the lower curve going from 0
to 5 and then we subtract the area of
the other lower curve going from 5 to 8
so we want the integrals of each of
these as follows so now we need to
simplify these integrals well this
middle integral will be easy to simplify
because it's the area of a quarter
circle with the radius of 5 so we don't
actually need to do the integral we know
that this will be equal to 5 squared
times pi over 4 which is 25 PI over 4 so
that's one part solved now this next
integral will split into two integrals
with the integral from 0 to 8 of the
square root minus the integral from 0 to
8 of the constant 5 the second integral
is easy to evaluate
it'll be equal to 40 so now how do we
solve for this first integral we use a
trigonometric substitution X is equal to
10 sine theta this means DX is equal to
10 cosine of theta d-theta we also need
to change the limits of integration from
going between 0 to the inverse sine of
0.8 so we substitute that in then we
need to simplify that 100 minus 100 sine
squared of theta is equal to 100 cosine
squared of theta we then simplify this
all out now we can solve for this
because the integral of cosine squared
of theta is very well known so we
substitute that in and we evaluate from
the limits of integration and it
simplifies to
50 times the inverse sine of 0.8 plus 24
and we subtract 40 so this will be 50
times the inverse sine 2.8 minus 16 so
that'll be the first integral we now
need to do a similar thing for this very
last integral we split it up into two
different integrals this first integral
will be equal to 15 this next integral
we can solve first by doing a use
substitution let's say U is equal to X
minus 5 so we change the limits of
integration and we now get the integrand
is the square root of 25 minus u squared
to solve for this integral we can do a
trigonometric substitution that U is
equal to 5 sine of theta it'll be a very
similar calculation to the first
integral that we figured out and I'm
just gonna skip some of the steps it all
comes down to be negative 6 minus 12.5
the inverse sine of 0.6 so we put this
all together and we get that this
simplifies to be 9 minus 12.5 times the
inverse sine of 0.6 so we now just need
to simplify this expression and that's
our answer we have 50 times the inverse
sine of 0.8 plus 12.5 times the inverse
sine 2.6 minus 25 minus 25 PI over 4 but
this is quite a bit more complicated
than the geometry and trigonometric
solution and I wondered how can we
reconcile it how can we get it to be
using the inverse tangent and just you
know two simple terms so let's try and
reconcile these two answers well we can
do that by drawing this right triangle
this 3 4 5 right triangle notice that
theta is equal to the inverse sine of
0.6 and alpha is equal to the inverse
sine of 0.8 furthermore theta plus alpha
is equal to PI over 2 because these two
angles sum to be 90 degrees therefore
12.5 times the inverse sine 2.8 plus
12.5 times the inverse sine of 0.6 must
be equal to 12.5 times pi over 2 so how
can that help us well what we're going
to do
is this first term where we have 50
times the inverse sine of 0.8 we're
going to split it up into thirty seven
point five times the inverse sine 0.8
and 12.5 times the inverse sine 2.8 so
now we have 12.5 times the inverse sine
of point eight plus twelve point five
times the inverse sine of point six and
this is equal to twenty five PI over
four so we substitute that in and it
cancels out with this other 25 pi over
four so this all simplifies to be thirty
seven point five times the inverse sine
two point eight minus twenty five and
this is approximately equal to nine
point seven seven so it's equivalent to
our answer it's just two terms but
something still bothered me about it
because it's the inverse sine and the
previous answer was equal to the inverse
tangent so how can we reconcile those
two components well I looked up this
formula if you substitute in X is equal
to 0.8 you get that this simplifies to
be two times the inverse tangent 0.5 and
that gives us our final equivalence that
this is equal to 75 times the inverse
tangent of 0.5 minus 25 so we verified
our solution using calculus did you
figure out this problem and which method
did you use thanks for watching this
video these math videos which can be
watched for free on YouTube inspire and
build confidence for people around the
world and they already have over 800
million views please subscribe for free
to get the newest videos and email me a
puzzle or mat topic presh a mind your
decisions calm if you so choose you can
check out my merchandise on teespring
you can check out my books which are
listed in the video description and you
can support me on patreon for exclusive
rewards thanks for watching and thanks
for your support